Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

By convention, the last numbered statement (also denoted by the “therefore”) is
the conclusion and the earlier numbered statements are the premises. This is
what we call putting an argument into standard argument form. We can now
give a more precise definition of an argument. An argument is a set of
statements, some of which (the premises) attempt to provide a reason for
thinking that some other statement (the conclusion) is true. Although arguments
are typically given in order to convince or persuade someone of the conclusion,
the argument itself is independent of one’s attempt to use it to convince or
persuade. For example, I have just given you this argument not in an attempt to
convince you that abortion is morally wrong, but as an illustration of what an
argument is. Later on in this chapter and in this book we will learn some
techniques of evaluating arguments, but for now the goal is to learn to identify
an argument, including its premises and conclusion(s). It is important to be able
to identify arguments and understand their structure, whether or not you agree
with conclusion of the argument. In the next section I will provide some
techniques for being able to identify arguments.
Exercise 1: Which of the following sentences are statements and which are
not?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

No one understands me but you.
Alligators are on average larger than crocodiles.
Is an alligator a reptile or a mammal?
An alligator is either a reptile or a mammal.
Don’t let any reptiles into the house.
You may kill any reptile you see in the house.
East Africans are not the best distance runners.
Obama is not a Democrat.
Some humans have wings.
Some things with wings cannot fly.
Was Obama born in Kenya or Hawaii?
Oh no! A grizzly bear!
Meet me in St. Louis.
We met in St. Louis yesterday.
I do not want to meet a grizzly bear in the wild.

3

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

1.2 Identifying arguments
The best way to identify whether an argument is present is to ask whether there
is a statement that someone is trying to establish as true by basing it on some
other statement. If so, then there is an argument present. If not, then there
isn’t. Another thing that can help in identifying arguments is knowing certain
key words or phrases that are premise indicators or conclusion indicators. For
example, recall Sally’s abortion argument:
Abortion is morally wrong because it is wrong to take the life of an
innocent human being, and a fetus is an innocent human being.
The word “because” here is a premise indicator. That is, “because” indicates
that what follows is a reason for thinking that abortion is morally wrong. Here is
another example:
I know that the student plagiarized since I found the exact same
sentences on a website and the website was published more than a year
before the student wrote the paper.
In this example, the word “since” is a premise indicator because what follows it
is a statement that is clearly intended to be a reason for thinking that the
student plagiarized (i.e., a premise). Notice that in these two cases, the premise
indicators “because” and “since” are interchangeable: I could have used
“because” in place of “since” or “since” in the place of “because” and the
meaning of the sentences would have been the same. In addition to premise
indicators, there are also conclusion indicators. Conclusion indicators mark that
what follows is the conclusion of an argument. For example,
Bob-the-arsonist has been dead for a year, so Bob-the-arsonist didn’t set
the fire at the East Lansing Starbucks last week.
In this example, the word “so” is a conclusion indicator because what follows it
is a statement that someone is trying to establish as true (i.e., a conclusion).
Here is another example of a conclusion indicator:
A poll administered by Gallup (a respected polling company) showed
candidate x to be substantially behind candidate y with only a week left
before the vote, therefore candidate y will probably not win the election.

4

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

In this example, the word “therefore” is a conclusion indicator because what
follows it is a statement that someone is trying to establish as true (i.e., a
conclusion). As before, in both of these cases the conclusion indicators “so”
and “therefore” are interchangeable: I could have used “so” in place of
“therefore” or “therefore” in the place of “so” and the meaning of the
sentences would have been the same.
Table 1 contains a list of some common premise and conclusion indicators:
Premise indicators
since
because
for
as
given that
seeing that
for the reason that
is shown by the fact that

Conclusion indicators
therefore
so
hence
thus
implies that
consequently
it follows that
we may conclude that

Although these words and phrases can be used to identify the premises and
conclusions of arguments, they are not failsafe methods of doing so. Just
because a sentence contains them does not mean that you are dealing with an
argument. This can easily be shown by examples like these:
I have been running competitively since 1999.
I am so happy to have finally finished that class.
Although “since” can function as a premise indicator and although “so” can
function as a conclusion indicator, neither one is doing so here. This shows that
you can’t simply mindlessly use occurrences of these words in sentences to show
that there is an argument being made. Rather, we have to rely on our
understanding of the English sentence in order to determine whether an
argument is being made or not. Thus, the best way to determine whether an
argument is present is by asking the question: Is there a statement that
someone is trying to establish as true or explain why it is true by basing it on
some other statement? If so, then there is an argument present. If not, then
there isn’t. Notice that if we apply this method to the above examples, we will
5

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

see that there is no argument present because there is no statement that
someone is trying to establish as true by basing it on some other statement. For
example, the sentence “I have been running competitively since 1999” just
contains one statement, not two. But arguments always require at least two
separate statements—one premise and one conclusion, so it cannot possibly be
an argument.
Another way of explaining why these occurrences of “so” and “since” do not
indicate that an argument is present is by noting that both premise indicators
and conclusion indicators are, grammatically, conjunctions. A grammatical
conjunction is a word that connects two separate statements. So, if a word or
term is truly being used as a premise or conclusion indicator, it must connect
two separate statements. Thus, if “since” were really functioning as a premise
indicator in the above example then what followed it would be a statement. But
“1999” is not a statement at all. Likewise, in the second example “so” is not
being used as a conclusion indicator because it is not conjoining two separate
statements. Rather, it is being used to modify the extent of “happy.” In
contrast, if I were to say “Tom was sleeping, so he couldn’t have answered the
phone,” then “so” is being used as a conclusion indicator. In this case, there
are clearly two separate statements (“Tom was sleeping” and “Tom couldn’t
have answered the phone”) and one is being used as the basis for thinking that
the other is true.
If there is any doubt about whether a word is truly a premise/conclusion
indicator or not, you can use the substitution test. Simply substitute another
word or phrase from the list of premise indicators or conclusion indicators and
see if the resulting sentence still makes sense. If it does, then you are probably
dealing with an argument. If it doesn’t, then you probably aren’t. For example,
we can substitute “it follows that” for “so” in the Bob-the-arsonist example:
Bob-the-arsonist has been dead for a year, it follows that Bob-the-arsonist
didn’t set the fire at the East Lansing Starbucks last week.
However, we cannot substitute “because” for “so” in the so-happy-I-finishedthat-class example:
I am because happy to have finally finished that class.

6

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

Obviously, in the latter case the substitution of one conclusion indicator for
another makes the sentence meaningless, which means that the “so” that
occurred originally wasn’t functioning as a conclusion indicator.
Exercise 2: Which of the following are arguments?
identify the conclusion of the argument.

If it is an argument,

1. The woman in the hat is not a witch since witches have long noses and
she doesn’t have a long nose.
2. I have been wrangling cattle since before you were old enough to tie
your own shoes.
3. Albert is angry with me so he probably won’t be willing to help me wash
the dishes.
4. First I washed the dishes and then I dried them.
5. If the road wasn’t icy, the car wouldn’t have slid off the turn.
6. Albert isn’t a fireman and he isn’t a fisherman either.
7. Are you seeing that rhinoceros over there? It is huge!
8. The fact that obesity has become a problem in the U.S. is shown by the
fact that obesity rates have risen significantly over the past four decades.
9. Bob showed me a graph with the rising obesity rates and I was very
surprised to see how much they’ve risen.
10. Albert isn’t a fireman because Albert is a Greyhound, which is a kind of
dog, and dogs can’t be firemen.
11. Charlie and Violet are dogs and since dogs don’t sweat, it is obvious that
Charlie and Violet don’t sweat.
12. The reason I forgot to lock the door is that I was distracted by the clown
riding a unicycle down our street while singing Lynyrd Skynyrd’s “Simple
Man.”
13. What Bob told you is not the real reason that he missed his plane to
Denver.
14. Samsung stole some of Apple’s patents for their smartphones, so Apple
stole some of Samsung’s patents back in retaliation.
15. No one who has ever gotten frostbite while climbing K2 has survived to
tell about it, therefore no one ever will.

7

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

1.3 Arguments vs. explanations
So far I have defined arguments in terms of premises and conclusions, where the
premises are supposed to provide a reason (support, evidence) for accepting
the conclusion. Many times the goal of giving an argument is simply to establish
that the conclusion is true. For example, when I am trying to convince someone
that obesity rates are rising in the U.S. I may cite evidence such as studies from
the Center for Disease Control (CDC) and the National Institute of Health (NIH).
The studies I cite would function as premises for the conclusion that obesity
rates are rising. For example:
We know that obesity is on the rise in the U.S. because multiple studies
carried out by the CDC and NIH have consistently shown a rise in obesity
over the last four decades.
We could put this simple argument into standard form like this:
1. Multiple studies by the CDC and NIH have consistently shown a rise in
obesity over the last four decades.
2. Therefore, obesity is on the rise in the U.S.
The standard form argument clearly distinguishes the premise from the
conclusion and shows how the conclusion is supposed to be supported by the
evidence offered in the premise. Again, the goal of this simple argument would
be to convince someone that the conclusion is true. However, sometimes we
already know that a statement or claim is true and we are trying to establish why
it is true rather than that it is true. An argument that attempts to show why its
conclusion is true is an explanation. Contrast the previous example with the
following:
The reason that the rate of obesity is on the rise in the U.S. is that the
foods we most often consume over the past four decades have
increasingly contained high levels of sugar and low levels of dietary fiber.
Since eating foods high in sugar and low in fiber triggers the insulin
system to start storing those calories as fat, it follows that people who
consume foods high in sugar and low in fiber will tend to store more of
the calories consumed as fat.

8

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

This passage gives an explanation for why obesity is on the rise in the U.S.
Unlike the earlier example, here it is taken for granted that obesity is on the rise
in the U.S. That is the claim whose truth we are trying to explain. We can put
the obesity explanation into standard form just like any other argument. In
order to do this, I will make some paraphrases of the premises and conclusion of
the argument (for more on how to do this, see section 1.5 below).
1. Over the past four decades, Americans have increasingly consumed
foods high in sugar and low in fiber.
2. Consuming foods high in sugar and low in fat triggers the insulin
system to start storing those calories as fat.
3. When people store more calories as fat, they tend to become obese.
4. Therefore, the rate of obesity is on the rise in the U.S.
Notice that in this explanation the premises (1-3) attempt to give a reason for
why the conclusion is true, rather than a reason for thinking that the conclusion is
true. That is, in an explanation we assume that what we are trying to explain
(i.e., the conclusion) is true. In this case, the premises are supposed to show
why we should expect or predict that the conclusion is true. Explanations often
give us an understanding of why the conclusion is true. We can think of
explanations as a type of argument, we just have to distinguish two different
types of argument: those that attempt to establish that their conclusion is true
(arguments), and those that attempt to establish why their conclusion is true
(explanations).
Exercise 3: Which of the following is an explanation and which is an
argument? Identify the main conclusion of each argument or explanation.
(Remember if the premise(s) seems to be establishing that the conclusion
is true, it is an argument, but if the premise(s) seems to be establishing
why the conclusion is true, it is an explanation.)
1. Wanda rode the bus today because her car was in the shop.
2. Since Wanda doesn’t have enough money in her bank account, she
has not yet picked up her car from the shop.
3. Either Bob or Henry rode the bus to work today. But it wasn’t Henry
because I saw him riding his bike to work. Therefore, it was Bob.
4. It can’t be snowing right now since it only snows when it is 32 degrees
or below and right now it is 40 degrees.

9

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

5. The reason some people with schizophrenia hear voices in their head
is that the cognitive mechanism that monitors their own self-talk is
malfunctioning and they attribute their own self-talk to some external
source.
6. Fracking should be allowed because, although it does involve some
environmental risk, it reduces our dependence on foreign oil and
there is much greater harm to the environment due to foreign oil
drilling than there is due to fracking.
7. Wanda could not have ridden the bus today because today is a citywide holiday and the bus service is not operating.
8. The Tigers lost their star pitcher due to injury over the weekend,
therefore the Tigers will not win their game against the Pirates.
9. No one living in Pompeii could have escaped before the lava from Mt.
Vesuvius hit. The reason is simple: the lava was flowing too fast and
there was nowhere to go to escape it in time.
10. The reason people’s allergies worsen when they move to Cincinnati is
that the pollen count in Cincinnati is higher than almost anywhere else
in the surrounding area.

1.4 More complex argument structures
So far we have seen that an argument consists of a premise (typically more than
one) and a conclusion. However, very often arguments and explanations have a
more complex structure than just a few premises that directly support the
conclusion. For example, consider the following argument:
No one living in Pompeii could have survived the eruption of Mt.
Vesuvius. The reason is simple: the lava was flowing too fast and there
was nowhere to go to escape it in time. Therefore, this account of the
eruption, which claims to have been written by an eyewitness living in
Pompeii, was not actually written by an eyewitness.
The main conclusion of this argument—the statement that depends on other
statements as evidence but doesn’t itself provide any evidence for any other
statement—is:
A. This account of the eruption of Mt. Vesuvius was not actually written
by an eyewitness.

10

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

However, the argument’s structure is more complex than simply having a couple
of premises that provide evidence directly for the conclusion. Rather, some
statement provides evidence directly for the main conclusion, but that statement
itself is supported by another statement. To determine the structure of an
argument, we must determine which statements support which. We can use our
premise and conclusion indicators to help with this. For example, the passage
contains the phrase, “the reason is…” which is a premise indicator, and it also
contains the conclusion indicator, “therefore.” That conclusion indicator helps
us to identify the main conclusion, but the more important thing to see is that
statement A does not itself provide evidence or support for any of the other
statements in the argument, which is the clearest reason why statement A is the
main conclusion of the argument. The next question we must answer is: which
statement most directly supports A? What most directly supports A is:
B. No one living in Pompeii could have survived the eruption of Mt.
Vesuvius.
However, there is also a reason offered in support of B. That reason is that:
C. The lava from Mt. Vesuvius was flowing too fast and there was
nowhere for someone living in Pompeii to go in order to escape it in
time.
So the main conclusion (A) is directly supported by B, and B is supported by C.
Since B acts as a premise for the main conclusion but is also itself the conclusion
of further premises, we refer to B as an intermediate conclusion. The important
thing to recognize here is that one and the same statement can act as both a
premise and a conclusion. Statement B is a premise that supports the main
conclusion (A), but it is also itself a conclusion that follows from C. Here is how
we would put this complex argument into standard form (using numbers this
time, as we always do when putting an argument into standard form):
1. The lava from Mt. Vesuvius was flowing too fast and there was
nowhere for someone living in Pompeii to go in order to escape it in
time.
2. Therefore, no one living in Pompeii could have survived the eruption
of Mt. Vesuvius. (from 1)

11

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

3. Therefore, this account of the eruption of Mt. Vesuvius was not
actually written by an eyewitness. (from 2)
Notice that at the end of statement 2 I have written in parentheses “from 1”
(and likewise at the end of statement 3 I have written “from 2”). This is a
shorthand way of saying: “this statement follows from statement 1.” We will use
this convention as a way of keeping track of the structure of the argument. It
may also help to think about the structure of an argument spatially, as figure 1
shows:

The main argument here (from 2 to 3) contains a subargument, in this case the
argument from 1 to 2. A subargument, as the term suggests, is a part of an
argument that provides indirect support for the main argument. The main
argument is simply the argument whose conclusion is the main conclusion.
Another type of structure that arguments can have is when two or more
premises provide direct but independent support for the conclusion. Here is an
example of an argument with that structure:
I know that Wanda rode her bike to work today because when she arrived
at work she had her right pant leg rolled up (which cyclists do in order to
keep their pants legs from getting caught in the chain). Moreover, our
coworker, Bob, who works in accounting, saw her riding towards work at
7:45 am.

12

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

The conclusion of this argument is “Wanda rode her bike to work today” and
there are two premises that provide independent support for it: the fact that
Wanda had her pant leg cuffed and the fact that Bob saw her riding her bike.
Here is the argument in standard form:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Wanda arrived at work with her right pant leg rolled up.
Cyclists often roll up their right pant leg.
Bob saw Wanda riding her bike towards work at 7:45.
Therefore, Wanda rode her bike to work today. (from 1-2, 3
independently)

Again, notice that next to statement 4 of the argument I have written the
premises from which that conclusion follows. In this case, in order to avoid any
ambiguity, I have noted that the support for the conclusion comes
independently from statements 1 and 2, on the one hand, and from statement 3,
on the other hand. It is important to point out that an argument or subargument
can be supported by one or more premises. We see this in the present
argument since the conclusion (4) is supported jointly by 1 and 2, and singly by
3. As before, we can represent the structure of this argument spatially, as figure
2 shows:

There are endless different argument structures that can be generated from
these few simple patterns. At this point, it is important to understand that
arguments can have these different structures and that some arguments will be
longer and more complex than others. Determining the structure of very
complex arguments is a skill that takes some time to master. Even so, it may
help to remember that any argument structure ultimately traces back to some
combination of these.

13

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

Exercise 4: Write the following arguments in standard form and show how
the argument is structured using a diagram like the ones I have used in
this section.
1. There is nothing wrong with prostitution because there is nothing
wrong with consensual sexual and economic interactions between
adults. Moreover, since there’s no difference between a man who
goes on a blind date with a woman, buys her dinner and then has sex
with her and a man who simply pays a woman for sex, that is another
reason for why there is nothing wrong with prostitution.
2. Prostitution is wrong because it involves women who have typically
been sexually abused as children. We know that most of these
women have been abused from multiple surveys done with women
who have worked in prostitution and that show a high percentage of
self-reported sexual abuse as children.
3. There was someone in this cabin recently because there was warm
water in the tea kettle and because there was wood still smoldering in
the fireplace. But the person couldn’t have been Tim because Tim has
been with me the whole time. Therefore, there must be someone else
in these woods.
4. It is possible to be blind and yet run in the Olympic Games since
Marla Runyan did it at the 2000 Sydney Olympics.
5. The train was late because it had to take a longer, alternate route
since the bridge was out.
6. Israel is not safe if Iran gets nuclear missiles since Iran has threatened
multiple times to destroy Israel and if Iran had nuclear missiles it would
be able to carry out this threat. Moreover, since Iran has been
developing enriched uranium, they have the key component needed
for nuclear weapons—every other part of the process of building a
nuclear weapon is simple compared to that. Therefore, Israel is not
safe.
7. Since all professional hockey players are missing front teeth and
Martin is a professional hockey player, it follows that Martin is missing
front teeth. And since almost all professional athletes who are missing
their front teeth have false teeth, it follows that Martin probably has
false teeth.
8. Anyone who eats the crab rangoon at China Food restaurant will
probably have stomach troubles afterward. It has happened to me
every time, which is why it will probably happen to other people as

14

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

well. Since Bob ate the crab rangoon at China Food restaurant, he will
probably have stomach troubles afterward.
9. Albert and Caroline like to go for runs in the afternoon in Hyde Park.
Since Albert never runs alone, we know that any time Albert is
running, Caroline is running too. But since Albert looks like he has just
run (since he is panting hard), it follows that Caroline must have ran
too.
10. Just because Jeremy’s prints were on the gun that killed Tim and the
gun was registered to Jeremy, it doesn’t follow that Jeremy killed Tim
since Jeremy’s prints would certainly be on his own gun and someone
else could have stolen Jeremy’s gun and used it to kill Tim.

1.5
Using your own paraphrases of premises and conclusions to
reconstruct arguments in standard form
Although sometimes we can just lift the premises and conclusion verbatim from
the argument, we cannot always do this. Paraphrases of premises or conclusions
are sometimes needed in order to make the standard form argument as clear as
possible. A paraphrase is the use of different words to capture the same idea in
a clearer way. There will always be multiple ways of paraphrasing premises and
conclusions and this means that there will never be just one way of putting an
argument into standard form. In order to paraphrase well, you will have to rely
on your understanding of English to come up with what you think is the best way
of capturing the essence of the argument. Again, typically there is no single
right way to do this, although there are certainly better and worse ways of doing
it. For example, consider the following argument:
Just because Jeremy’s prints were on the gun that killed Tim and the gun
was registered to Jeremy, it doesn’t follow that Jeremy killed Tim since
Jeremy’s prints would certainly be on his own gun and someone else
could have stolen Jeremy’s gun and used it to kill Tim.
What is the conclusion of this argument? (Think about it before reading on.)
Here is one way of paraphrasing the conclusion:
The fact that Jeremy’s prints were on the gun that killed Tim and the gun
was registered to Jeremy doesn’t mean that Jeremy killed Tim.

15

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

This statement seems to capture the essence of the main conclusion in the
above argument. The premises of the argument would be:
1. Jeremy’s prints would be expected to be on a gun that was registered
to him
2. Someone could have stolen Jeremy’s gun and then used it to kill Tim
Notice that while I have paraphrased the first premise, I have left the second
premise almost exactly as it appeared in the original paragraph. As I’ve said,
paraphrases are needed in order to try to make the standard form argument as
clear as possible and this is what I’ve tried to do in capturing premise 1 as well
as the conclusion of this argument. So here is the reconstructed argument in
standard form:
1. Jeremy’s prints would be expected to be on a gun that was registered
to him
2. Someone could have stolen Jeremy’s gun and then used it to kill Tim
3. Therefore, the fact that Jeremy’s prints were on the gun that killed Tim
and the gun was registered to Jeremy doesn’t mean that Jeremy killed
Tim. (from 1-2)
However, as I have just noted, there is more than one way of paraphrasing the
premises and conclusion of the argument. To illustrate this, I will give a second
way that one could accurately capture this argument in standard form. Here is
another way of expressing the conclusion:
We do not know that Jeremy killed Tim.
That is clearly what the above argument is trying to ultimately establish and it is
a much simpler (in some ways) conclusion than my first way of paraphrasing the
conclusion. However, it also takes more liberties in interpreting the argument
than my original paraphrase. For example, in the original argument there is no
occurrence of the word “know.” That is something that I am introducing in my
own paraphrase. That is a totally legitimate thing to do, as long as introducing
new terminology helps us to clearly express the essence of the premise or
conclusion that we’re trying to paraphrase.1 Since my second paraphrase of the
How do we know that a paraphrase is accurate? Unfortunately, there is no simple way to
answer this question. The only answer is that you must rely on your mastery and understanding
of English in order to determine for yourself whether the paraphrase is a good one or not. This
1

16

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

conclusion differs from my first paraphrase, you can expect that my premises will
differ also. So how shall I paraphrase the premises that support this conclusion?
Here is another way of paraphrasing the premises and putting the argument into
standard form:
1. Tim was killed by a gun that was registered to Jeremy and had
Jeremy’s prints on it.
2. It is possible that Jeremy’s gun was stolen from him.
3. If Jeremy’s gun was stolen from him, then Jeremy could not have
killed Tim.
4. Therefore, we do not know that Jeremy killed Tim. (from 1-3)
Notice that this standard form argument has more premises than my first
reconstruction of the standard form argument (which consisted of only three
statements). I have taken quite a few liberties in interpreting and paraphrasing
this argument, but what I have tried to do is to get down to the most essential
logic of the original argument. The paraphrases of the premises I have used are
quite different from the wording that occurs in the original paragraph. I have
introduced phrases such as “it is possible that” as well as conditional
statements (if…then statements), such as premise 3. Nonetheless, this
reconstruction seems to get at the essence of the logic of the original argument.
As long as your paraphrases help you to do that, they are good paraphrases.
Being able to reconstruct arguments like this takes many years of practice in
order to do it well, and much of the material that we will learn later in the text
will help you to better understand how to capture an argument in standard form,
but for now it is important to recognize that there is never only one way of
correctly capturing the standard form of an argument. And the reason for this is
that there are multiple, equally good, ways of paraphrasing the premises and
conclusion of an argument.

1.6. Validity
So far we have discussed what arguments are and how to determine their
structure, including how to reconstruct arguments in standard form. But we
have not yet discussed what makes an argument good or bad. The central
concept that you will learn in logic is the concept of validity. Validity relates to
is one of those kinds of skills that is difficult to teach, apart from just improving one’s mastery of
the English language.

17

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

1.1 What is an argument?
This is an introductory textbook in logic and critical thinking. Both logic and
critical thinking centrally involve the analysis and assessment of arguments.
“Argument” is a word that has multiple distinct meanings, so it is important to
be clear from the start about the sense of the word that is relevant to the study
of logic. In one sense of the word, an argument is a heated exchange of
differing views as in the following:
Sally: Abortion is morally wrong and those who think otherwise are
seeking to justify murder!
Bob: Abortion is not morally wrong and those who think so are right-wing
bigots who are seeking to impose their narrow-minded views on all the
rest of us!
Sally and Bob are having an argument in this exchange. That is, they are each
expressing conflicting views in a heated manner. However, that is not the sense
of “argument” with which logic is concerned. Logic concerns a different sense
of the word “argument.” An argument, in this sense, is a reason for thinking
that a statement, claim or idea is true. For example:
Sally: Abortion is morally wrong because it is wrong to take the life of an
innocent human being, and a fetus is an innocent human being.
In this example Sally has given an argument against the moral permissibility of
abortion. That is, she has given us a reason for thinking that abortion is morally
wrong. The conclusion of the argument is the first four words, “abortion is
morally wrong.” But whereas in the first example Sally was simply asserting that
abortion is wrong (and then trying to put down those who support it), in this
example she is offering a reason for why abortion is wrong.
We can (and should) be more precise about our definition of an argument. But
before we can do that, we need to introduce some further terminology that we
will use in our definition. As I’ve already noted, the conclusion of Sally’s
argument is that abortion is morally wrong. But the reason for thinking the
conclusion is true is what we call the premise. So we have two parts of an
argument: the premise and the conclusion. Typically, a conclusion will be
supported by two or more premises. Both premises and conclusions are
statements. A statement is a type of sentence that can be true or false and

1

Chapter 1: Reconstructing and analyzing arguments

corresponds to the grammatical category of a “declarative sentence.”
example, the sentence,

For

The Nile is a river in northeastern Africa
is a statement. Why? Because it makes sense to inquire whether it is true or
false. (In this case, it happens to be true.) But a sentence is still a statement
even if it is false. For example, the sentence,
The Yangtze is a river in Japan
is still a statement; it is just a false statement (the Yangtze River is in China). In
contrast, none of the following sentences are statements:
Please help yourself to more casserole
Don’t tell your mother about the surprise
Do you like Vietnamese pho?
The reason that none of these sentences are statements is that it doesn’t make
sense to ask whether those sentences are true or false (rather, they are requests
or commands, and questions, respectively).
So, to reiterate: all arguments are composed of premises and conclusions, which
are both types of statements. The premises of the argument provide a reason
for thinking that the conclusion is true. And arguments typically involve more
than one premise. A standard way of capturing the structure of an argument is
by numbering the premises and conclusion. For example, recall Sally’s
argument against abortion:
Abortion is morally wrong because it is wrong to take the life of an
innocent human being, and a fetus is an innocent human being.
We could capture the structure of that argument like this:
1. It is morally wrong to take the life of an innocent human being
2. A fetus is an innocent human being
3. Therefore, abortion is morally wrong

2

